The Joe Rogan experience.
What was the research done with mice with myostatin inhibitors?
Did that not increase lifespan as well?
Yeah, sure. I mean,
a lot of things have extended extended lifespan a fair bit,
but what we have at the moment is not all the components of what I
just said. If you do something genetic to mice,
or if you do it to them throughout their lives,
then we can already get that year, year and a half out of mice. Certainly. Yeah.
Okay. But not if you start at 18 months, if you start at 18 months,
the best we can do it maybe four months. So that's the difference.
You've got to be able to start late and get the big extension,
and you're not going to get that without bonafide rejuvenation.
So that's not going to come by way of genetics.
Well, even if it did come by with genetics, it wouldn't matter.
It wouldn't persuade my colleagues or me that we were on the
brink of doing it for humans who have the misfortune of being already alive.
Um, so the rejuvenation is going to come through some sort of biologics.
Yes. Through the kinds of things we're working on that I mentioned earlier,
stem cells, gene therapy, to do various things, to introduce, for example,
bacterial enzymes that can break down waste products for analytics that I talked
about pharmaceuticals to do other things.
Um, what about the use of CRISPR show? Well.
Chris was a very, very important part of this. So.
Can you please explain what CRISPR means when people don't know where we're
talking about?
Yes.
So CRISPR is a technology that was first developed about eight years ago now,
and it is the exploitation of a bacterial
mechanism that allows bacteria to defend themselves against viruses.
Uh, essentially how it works is that it allows us to
change the sequence of our genome in a particular cell,
um, in a very specific way,
it's often called gene editing and there are other technologies for gene editing
that already existed before crest, but a very laborious,
very expensive and very clunky that is far, far cheaper and easier to use.
So what that does is it allows us, for example,
to inactivate a gene or for that matter to, um,
change the frequency of a gene from a mutant form into a normal
form so that it works when it was previously not working now,
doing that in the laboratory in a Petri dish is fair enough. The question is,
can we do it in the body? And initially, no,
initially this technology was too error prone.
It was prone to do what,
what George Church has called genetic vandalism and, um, make,
have what's called off target effects. In other words,
basically do other changes to the genome elsewhere that you didn't want,
but of course,
people have known this and people who've have been working really hard to
improve the technology.
And it's getting to the point now where it's possible to actually use it on
humans. Maybe, you know, it's getting, it's getting there. Um,
now you can't do everything with CRISPR.
One thing you definitely can't do with CRISPR is insert new genes into the
genome. And that's something we really need to be able to do.
But actually one of our big projects is a kind of two step thing where we use
CRISPR to make a small change to the genome that allows us to insert last
genes where we couldn't previously. Um, so yeah,
so CRISPR is huge and it's, you've not only in aging research,
but across the whole board of biomedical world.
That's, uh, they have done some work in China,
apparently on live human beings.
Very controversial.
What happened was that a group in China use CRISPR
to alter the DNA of embryos that were going to be used for
IVF for a bit of elevation.
And the change that was made was itself.
Quite a curious one,
essentially what they did was they tried to change a gene called CCR five
into a mutant form that doesn't work,
but that in an inactive form protects the body
from infection by HIV.
This is something that was discovered a long time ago. Um,
and maybe 1% of people have this genotype. Um,
and so this was introduced, unfortunately, first of all,
it probably wasn't done very well, but also, well, what people looked at the,
uh, at the process and it probably didn't,
they probably didn't make the correct, um, modification. Uh,
but also it's not clear whether doing it for someone lifelong is actually a
good thing, because as I say,
it's an inactivation of a gene that must exist for a reason,
or it wouldn't exist at all. Right.
We'll have a side-effect of increased intelligence.
That is complete speculation, isn't it? Yes. Why.
What would cause them to speculate that.
People speculate all the time?
That's just like clickbait stuff that gets people excited about it. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay.
Um, but yeah, so anyway, the other thing was that there's not,
it's not obvious why it's even worthwhile to make
an embryo genetically resistant to HIV. First of all,
they don't have HIV yet in the first place and they may never get it.
And secondly,
we've got drugs that worked pretty well to control HIV antiretroviral. So, um,
yeah. So, um,
so it's not obvious why this was a sensible thing to do in the first place.
However, it's certainly got a whole bunch of debate going. Um.
Yeah. Well, when I hear about something like that, I always assume,
first of all, I mean, just American prejudice. You assume that it's in China,
they're doing something crazy. Right.
And you also assume that if they're telling you about someone who's been
altered,
that means that they've probably been doing this for a decade or since CRISPR
was initially initiated eight years ago. You never know. Yeah. You never know.
It's just, it's interesting to me. And, um,
I don't want them to do it on people, but when they do do it on people,
I'm fascinated, you know, it's, I don't.
Well, that's right. I mean,
that's the attitude that I have and a lot of people have to medical tourism in
general so that the, um, you know,
th these are not adequately regulated treatments and
they are certainly not adequately characterized. In other words,
the people who get the treatments are people who pay for them rather than people
who have been chosen to be in a standardized group of any kind.
And that tends to be very little follow-up,
but still it's better than nothing in the sense that, um, you know,
some information exists about the efficacy and safety of these treatments as a
result, the more that exists, the better,
the more that people who are administering these treatments can be India to
reveal that day. So the better, you know, even if it's anonymized, um,
but you know, uh, other P other, some scientists,
quite a lot of scientists take a much stronger view that, you know,
we just should oppose all of this period. And we should just say, you know,
everyone who, who indulges,
who gives treatments to people in off shore places should be shut down as much
as best we can and should be demonized. I don't really think that's true.
I think there's a halfway house.
Um, personally, I've had, uh, my, my family,
my mother has gone to Panama twice and she was on the verge of a knee
replacement. And now she walks without pain.
Yeah. I bet you bet actually went to Neil Riordan clinic. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, there are a lot of people who have very good stories,
I of nails group and, um, I,
of course the thing is you don't know, unless someone has a really bad story,
whether things are going wrong. So, um, I mean,
I don't know whether Neil release his numbers,
that the total number of patients per year, that he treats.
So we don't know what hit rates.
Yeah. I don't know. I just do know that I have, uh, speaking, spoken to, uh,
several fighters from the UFC that have gone down there. And again,
my mother was, I mean, she didn't want to get a knee replacement.
So when I sent her down there and it took key,
she's 52, she's 73.
So it took her somewhere around six to eight months before
she started feeling anything. She was really worried that it wasn't gonna work.
But then at eight months in just the pain just went away and it's continued to
get better.
And then I sent her down a second time and I'm going to keep sending her down
there. It's just, it's at a pretty profound effect,
but what's fascinating to me is they do three days of intravenous therapy.
And the intravenous therapy has,
I don't know if it's just my imagination, but she looks younger. Like she looks,
she looks more vibrant. You know, like when I saw her,
she came to my house for Christmas. I mean, she looked better.
She looked a year younger than she did the last time I saw her.
Yeah. I mean, um, you know,
this is what we would hope that stem cell therapy with this,
but I remind you of what I said about that original pocket since trial for more
than 25 years ago for 15 years, really didn't know that one.
That was right. Exactly.
So only a few people benefited the people who did benefit, benefit,
benefited enormously, but huge numbers of people had no benefits.
Now that is the kind of stage that we're in for a lot
of stem cell therapies.
Right now Parkinson's disease is a kind of outlier in the sense that the
desired function of the stem cell is really well understood.
So what kinds of stem cells to introduce into the body and where to introduce
them is not in doubt.
Most of themselves therapies are not that far along.
So every time anyone gets treated right now,
it's still an experiment and that's okay up to a point,
but it does mean that we're all learning curve and it's vital
to have the people like now who are administering the therapy to quite a lot of
people to actually not just, you know,
live off the stories of,
of high-profile people who get good benefits and talk them up,
but actually to go and release the full data unexpurgated,
you know, including any negative stuff and including follow-up,
that's the key thing,
because so many therapies in regenerative medicine in general have the
potential to be beneficial over the first few months to a year or whatever.
And then to start having side effects that are detrimental,
what have you heard that are detrimental side effects? So what of course,
the biggest thing that we always have to worry about is cancer,
because I think it's true for a whole bunch of things, you know, telomerase,
activators, and so on. The thing is that aging can,
in some senses be characterized as a trade-off between cancer
and everything else. In other words,
a huge amount of what goes wrong with the body late in
life is the result of a kind of dialing down of
regenerative functions that we actually do naturally have in the body,
but which are not as active in older people as they are in younger people.
And so of course we have to ask, why are they less active?
And a lot of biologists, including myself,
believe that a huge part of part of that is adaptive. In other words,
it is kind of the body recognizing that
there is, as time goes on,
I progressively higher number of cells in the body that are almost cancerous and
that have to be kind of kept in check in order not to become properly cancerous
because of course,
cancer is the result of a gradual accumulation of mutations and so on in the
cell. Right. Um, and so yes, um,
every time that you are improving regenerative capacity,
whether of the cells that you put in,
or more importantly of the cells that are nearby, the cells you put in, um,
you are potentially taking a risk of hastening,
the onset of actual cancer.